Thank you.
I need my clicker, don't I?
Aha.
I'm very pleased to be here this morning.
I will say first of all
I want to apologize for Mr.
Bob Fraser who is the senior
product manager for WebObjects.
He decided foolishly to plan a
vacation in Costa Rica well after the
Worldwide Developer Conference so that
he would not miss anything important.
So Bob is in Costa Rica this week.
And I'm very pleased to come
here and talk to you about the
State of the Union with WebObjects.
As some of you may have heard me
say in the developer technology
track overview yesterday,
I've been back at Apple now for about
12 weeks or actually about 11 weeks.
This is my 12th week back.
And in my previous life at Apple actually
I dealt extensively with WebObjects.
In fact,
I was one of the product managers
for WebObjects at Next back in 1996.
So I want to tell you today first
of all some things that you're
going to learn from this session.
We have a WebObjects overview which
basically talks about web analytics.
We have a web analytics overview which
We're going to talk about the
direction for the WebObjects product
and we're going to also bring
up Catherine Wentz to talk about the
documentation state of the union.
. First, the overview of WebObjects.
For those of you who are not
familiar with WebObjects,
it is really the easiest way to
build J2EE compatible solutions.
And for those of you who are
familiar with WebObjects,
this is still the easiest way to
build J2EE compatible solutions.
That's actually the good news.
It's not just a marketing claim.
We have fantastic technology for building
Java enterprise applications at Apple.
WebObjects contains really
everything you need to build these
enterprise class applications.
There's an IDE.
Actually, I like to joke there's like
two or three IDEs right now,
but we're working on getting to one.
You get database mapping.
You get code-free rapid prototyping.
You get the ability to
provide web services,
which of course are very important today.
And you get tools for HTML page layout.
The advantages of what we provide with
WebObjects over other development tools
for Java Enterprise applications are,
first of all, that we actually can
accelerate time to market.
And we do that in a number of ways.
We do that partly because we enable very
rapid prototyping of your applications.
We can actually get you
to a functional prototype,
data-driven application extremely
quickly with the WebObjects technology.
And we then allow developers to do
more because we give you so much out
of the box with very little effort.
Developers can focus on the
code that specifically adds
value for their application.
I also like to say, jokingly,
they can focus on their core
competency if they have one.
And overall, what you get from this is a
reduced cost of ownership.
You get the ability to write
an application that does more.
You get to write less code.
Because you write less code,
you test less code.
You maintain less code.
And you have to make fewer changes.
As your business evolves.
And all of this has a net result of
much lower cost of ownership for an
application during its lifecycle.
So we like to think of WebObjects as
a kind of a server-side digital hub.
It's an application server that can
generate web services as a presentation,
HTML web pages as a presentation.
It can connect to
Java client applications.
And of course, on the back end,
it can be driven by our business systems,
driven by our databases.
The architecture then is
a three-tier architecture
where we start with our data,
which could be inside a database
connected through JDBC or
a directory through JNDI.
We have Java code that
represents our business logic.
Effectively,
we capture our business policy
in the form of Java code in
a business objects layer.
Then we present it to our clients or
customers through web applications,
through web services,
and through Java applications.
The development workflow
is actually quite nice.
You can start with the database
and basically work your way from
left to right in the diagram.
So you, from the database,
run our EO Modeler tool.
The EO Modeler tool will actually reverse
engineer the schema of your database
and it will generate for you business
objects and generate Java stub code,
which you then put into the
Project Builder environment.
And in Project Builder,
that's where you actually
can write the Java code that
captures your business rules.
So this is where you're
going to get the data.
You're going to get the
business or enterprise objects
that are that middle layer,
the objects that will
encapsulate data and policy for
your enterprise application.
You can then go through the
WebObjects Builder to create
a web-based presentation.
You can go through our
Web Services Assistant to create a web
service from those enterprise objects.
Or you can go through
Interface Builder to create a
Java application for the desktop.
So first, building the model.
As you can probably guess from
this representation of three tiers,
building the enterprise object
model is an essential step in
building a WebObjects application.
And the EO Modeler tool lets
you reverse engineer a database.
So it can go in and find all the tables,
all the relationships,
and represent that in the object
model as entities and relationships.
Or you can actually start with
the ideal model for your database
and generate the schema in the
database using the EO Modeler tool.
So EO Modeler can actually go and
drop tables in your database as well.
And EO Modeler then generates
the Java class files to represent
your enterprise objects.
So it really does capture the
entire process of encapsulating
your data and your business
logic in these nice Java objects,
these enterprise objects.
And this is a screenshot of the
EO Modeler tool at work where we
actually see a movie database and we
can see some entities like movies.
Talent, directors, et cetera,
and the relationships between
them and their representatives,
very traditional, you know, one-to-one,
one-to-many, many-to-many, et cetera,
in the visual environment of EO Modeler.
Now, the key to our enterprise objects
framework is really providing
for automated data access.
Really, really important point.
There is no need to write SQL.
You can actually be a very,
very lazy programmer of database
applications and not have to learn
how to write SQL to do extremely
powerful enterprise objects.
This gives you not only the ability to
be extremely lazy but also the ability
to have some database independence.
And being able to switch databases is
important in a couple of different ways.
One is you may be, for instance,
evaluating today migrating
from Oracle to running on,
you know, Sybase on XServe as a
really great solution.
Look at these beautiful things.
Or more commonly,
you're probably going to be
developing on something like OpenBase,
FrontBase, MySQL on your desktop machine,
and you can actually very easily with
no code migrate that to your deployment
database that might be Sybase or
Oracle or another database system.
The other thing that you get out
of our automated data access in
the Enterprise Objects framework is
essentially transparent persistence.
So you get the ability to very easily
make your Enterprise Objects persist,
and they persist in the form of
transactions to the back-end data system.
What you get then is a
better development process.
You get a process in which you can start,
very quickly get a prototype application.
You can then flow into
refining the business logic,
refining the presentation.
You can go to customize the specific
areas of the functionality of
the application that need to be
customized to meet your business needs,
and then you can polish the application.
And as a result,
you're going to get more feedback.
You're going to get, excuse me,
you're going to get more opportunities
to improve the application and
serve your customers better and
get something closer to what,
you know,
people working in competing environments
might get with their 2.0 product
and your 1.0 product because of the
time that you're given and the tools
that you're given up front with the,
you know,
tremendous prototyping capabilities.
Building web applications,
we provide a graphical HTML editor.
It's called WebObjects Builder.
What WebObjects Builder allows you to
do is to very easily marry the business
logic and data in your enterprise
objects to a web-based presentation.
We have palettes of reusable components.
In this screen shot,
you can see such a palette over here
on the right side of your window.
And on the bottom of this main window,
what you see is, in fact,
a browser or column view in which you
are navigating the entities inside an
enterprise object and then associating
those with presentation elements in
the HTML in your web application.
So the idea here is we
generate dynamic pages.
In effect, the WebObjects builder and
the WebObjects architecture
allow you to isolate your HTML,
the layout that describes
your beautiful presentation,
from the logic and
obviously from the data.
Well, what's important about this?
We provide, first of all,
all of the session management security
and everything else on the back end,
and we take care of multiple
forms of presentation for you,
so you can very easily lay out something
that is XML or another type of layout,
and the WebObjects elements generate the
parts that are data-driven inside there.
It's interoperable with JSPs.
It's got excellent localization support,
in fact, very,
very strong localization support.
But I actually think one of the more
important things is that fundamentally
you don't have this problem of some
guy with 19 body piercings up in
San Francisco going and blowing away
some important piece of the logic
of the application because he was
messing around with the layout and
the beauty pages that were there.
And you're not, in turn,
destroying the beautiful layout that
the marketing people worked for 15
years on in order to get some new
piece of logic in the application.
So separating those two makes the
application much more maintainable,
gives you much more flexibility in
terms of having the best possible
presentation and the right business
logic for the flow of your application
-- or the right user interface logic
for the flow of your application.
dynamic web services.
So you probably by now heard
something about web services if
you're doing web development.
They are the new hype
thing in the web world.
Standards-based web services really help
to drive application integration today.
Server-to-server application integration,
client-to-server application integration.
And one of the great things about
web services is we see that web
services are interoperable with
many different environments,
many different programming languages,
and they're empowering a new class
of programmers to build these highly
integrated network-driven applications.
So there's some very exciting stuff
happening in the world of web services.
And we at Apple are providing some really
powerful tools for enabling web services.
You can basically be a client or
a vendor of web services using
the WebObjects environment.
We provide that.
We provide the tools for configuration
and testing of the web services,
for code-free generation of web services
from your existing enterprise objects.
And, you know,
I think the key point is there's no
need for you to worry about all of
the alphabet soup of web services.
Just like we take care of generating
the SQL behind the scenes with
Enterprise Objects Framework,
we can take care of generating
what you need for web services
using our web services assistant
and the tools in WebObjects.
So we make it very easy to
build very powerful web services
within the WebObjects product.
And this is a screenshot of our
web services assistant showing
specifically how we can actually take,
in this case,
an enterprise object and edit
the representation of the,
you know, internal API versus what
we are vending externally.
And then what's nice is not only
can you edit that representation,
generate the appropriate files,
but in addition,
the web services assistant enables
you to test that so that you can
actually interact with that web service
and see how it's going to function.
So not only can you be a vendor
of Web services by taking
your EOs and actually vending
them out using our tools,
but in fact you can be a
client of Web services.
Mac OS X provides some really
powerful Web services capability.
We've already got the tools to
automatically generate code from WSDL.
So there's a lot of real power for
Web services built into WebObjects,
and I would encourage you to
explore this at more length,
and we'll have some sessions
later on to cover this in detail.
[Transcript missing]
Another nice thing about deployment
in the WebObjects environment is
that you can start simple and then
make your life more complicated as
demands may make that necessary.
So basically you can start with,
particularly in the
development environment,
your database, your application server,
and your web server all
sitting on the same machine.
And as the user community
for the application grows,
you can add instances of your WebObjects
application and you can serve the
requests from your users much more
readily with multiple instances
of your application than with one.
And scale your application that
way even on a single machine.
Now, hopefully you've written the
world's best application for
whatever your competency might be.
And you're going to get
serious demand for this.
And when that happens,
you actually are able to very
easily partition the WebObjects.
You can start with your web
server from the application
instances from the database server.
So you can now run those
on multiple machines.
It doesn't have to be three at first.
You could partition this in other ways.
And still scale application
instances horizontally.
And in fact,
also begin to scale horizontally
with your web servers.
So you can very easily scale
the application effectively just
by putting multiple machines
running application instances,
multiple machines running web servers,
load balancers in front of this stuff.
And grow web applications
to enormous size.
And that's what we're going to do.
And we have some great
examples of that at Apple.
Obviously things like our Apple store and
some other examples I'll discuss later.
Now, after hearing all of this from me,
the marketing guy,
you are desperate to get
your hands on WebObjects.
And the good news is we
provide a free trial version.
So you can actually go right now,
those of you who are sitting
on PowerBooks in the audience,
to the URL on your screen and get a
free 30-day trial version for Mac OS X.
We actually encourage you to read the
Web Services with WebObjects article
that we have up at the developer.com.
dot apple dot com website.
And then once the 30 days is up,
you're hooked.
And you get this fantastic
package for $699,
which includes the development
and deployment licenses.
And we encourage you to check out
the WebObjects website if you want
to learn more about the product.
Another great way to get WebObjects,
as it turns out, is to buy an XServe.
This attractive carrying case
for WebObjects basically is a
one-U rack mountable enclosure.
It's got a great server operating system
which vaguely resembles Mac OS X server.
And it bundles a WebObjects deployment
license so you can actually do
unlimited deployment from one of these.
[Transcript missing]
So that's a little update
on what WebObjects is,
some of the things that have
happened recently with WebObjects.
Where are we going?
So I want to talk about three areas
of things that surround WebObjects and
what exactly is going to be happening
in these areas over the next few months.
First of all, developer tools.
So we're going to start
from the assumption that
since this is a 600 track,
you guys are enterprise developers.
I want to emphasize that
we've been working hard to
not destabilize the enterprise
development environment we provide.
So today we are supporting development
of WebObjects applications in the
December 2002 developer tools release.
This is a very, very early release.
This is a very good, very solid,
stable development release for you.
We are actually supporting WebObjects
development in Xcode in Panther.
So when we get to the GM of Xcode,
that will completely support
Java and WebObjects development.
And I can't emphasize that enough for
those of you who may be interested in
moving to Xcode in the near future.
Excuse me?
You can't hear me very well.
I can't speak up a lot more than I am.
I said I can't.
So, excuse me.
WebObjects will be completely
supported in Xcode in Panther.
So when we ship the Xcode
development tool as a GM,
we will support WebObjects
in Java development.
That's not something
that's complete today.
And so what I would say is that right now
there are some of the features that you
can actually experiment with in Xcode,
but it's not something that's
fully compatible today.
So if you are using tools
today to develop WebObjects
applications for production,
we strongly encourage you to stick with
the December 2002 development tools.
If you want to explore some of the
future directions that we've got
with Java and WebObjects development,
we would strongly encourage you
to take a look in that exploratory
mode at what we're doing in Xcode,
but understand that we're not
yet to having the full feature
set and the full support in
Xcode for WebObjects development.
: Today, WebObjects applications are
supported under Java 1.3.1.
Our WebObjects 5.2.1 release improves
WebObjects compatibility with Java 1.4.1.
And in Panther,
WebObjects applications will
be supported under Java 1.4.1.
: So, today,
as a part of Mac OS X Server,
we ship the WebObjects
application server.
. We ship Tomcat as a
part of Mac OS X server.
You can deploy a WebObjects
application on top of the WebObjects
application server or you can
deploy it on top of Tomcat.
As a part of Panther Server,
we're adding to the mix JBoss.
And I'll talk more in a second about
why we think JBoss is a fantastic
addition to what we're doing with
WebObjects and Mac OS X Panther Server.
But the key point is that you can
deploy WebObjects applications on JBoss.
So JBoss.
Today, JBoss is in fact the number one
application server for J2EE development.
And it is that for a lot of reasons.
But it's got the point of 2 million
downloads a year and growing.
And we're seeing that the key
thing about JBoss is it supports
a lot of the key J2EE and...
[Transcript missing]
So what are we doing with
JBoss and Panther Server?
Well, in effect,
we're taking the JBoss environment
and we're addressing a couple
of critical areas where JBoss
has been a little bit weak.
As I mentioned,
it's the number one development
server for J2EE applications,
but it's not the number
one deployment server.
And it's had a few weaknesses
in terms of the management of
deployment and the management
of the applications as they run.
And so what we're doing at Apple is,
in fact, doing what we do best.
We're providing some tools to help
graphically manage the configuration and
deployment of J2EE applications in JBoss.
We're also working on WebObjects 5.2.2.
And as I mentioned earlier,
one key element of what we're doing there
is going to be Java 1.4.1 qualification.
Another key element,
as you can suspect from
what I've just said,
is JBoss on Panther Server qualification.
And we're working on things to
provide much better J2EE integration.
What does that mean?
Well, first of all,
we're going to be supporting JAR bundles.
And what I mean by this is that, in fact,
we're going to use Java native
way of calling resources,
which is going to make it much easier
to deploy in a pure Java environment.
So you're not going to have to deal with
NSBundle issues for calling resources.
We're going to support log4j logging,
which is a much more standard
Java logging mechanism.
And we're going to support JNDI for
both properties configuration
and data source mapping.
And the key point here is that
data source configuration doesn't
have to be file driven now.
It can be JNDI driven,
which can make it much more dynamic
in terms of managing the deployment of
an application in a J2EE environment.
How does this affect WebObjects
development workflow?
I talked earlier about this process
of going and reverse engineering your
data source and then working on your
business logic in the project builder
environment to do your Java coding.
And what we're going to be doing is
basically providing the tools through
some new capabilities with xDocklet and
Ant to enhance this process and make it
much easier to build J2EE applications.
XDocklet is basically a tool
for aspect-oriented programming,
and effectively what you can do
is use some special Java doc tags
in your code to add metadata.
I think the key thing here is
that you'll be able to maintain
one file instead of five,
10, 12 files to represent one
of these enterprise objects.
And it's going to handle all of
the code and file generation,
the wars, EJBs, ears,
and XML deployment descriptors.
The EO Bean Assistant provides the
ability to create entity-based code.
We have a lot of
EO Bean from EO model files,
and we provide a command line
version for automated builds.
And so what this does,
the capability with xDocklet and the
new features in EO Bean Assistant is
basically to improve this
J2EE development workflow so that
now basically out of project builder
you'll be able to generate all
of the elements you need to deploy
a J2EE application very easily.
So that covers basically the
WebObjects State of the Union.
And at this point,
I'd like to invite Katherine Wentz,
the Documentation Manager,
on the stage to talk about the
Documentation State of the Union.
Katherine?
Thanks, Wiley.
Hi, this morning I'd like to
talk about two things.
The new documentation we delivered
for the 5.2 release and I'd
like to introduce you to the new
developer documentation website.
For the 5.2.2 release,
we delivered over 500
new pages of content.
We added new documents to
accompany the new features of 5.2.
We enhanced existing documentation
and published new documentation
in response to customer feedback.
At this time, I'd like to express my
appreciation for the feedback
that we get on the documentation.
First of all,
it shows us that developers are
reading the documentation and
getting the information they need.
Secondly, the WebObjects audience is
fairly sophisticated and savvy.
And so the feedback that
we get is very detailed,
focused, and specific.
This slide and the next
list the new documents we
delivered for the 5.2 release.
I'll just highlight a few of them.
Web services.
It explains the sample projects that
are available both on the product CD and
on the new website downloadable from
inside the HTML version of the document.
Web services.
It explains the sample projects that
are available both on the product CD and
on the new website downloadable from
inside the HTML version of the document.
EnterpriseObjects.
It's back after a long absence.
It's very comprehensive.
It covers information for
all levels of developers,
but it's primarily intended for the
intermediate and advanced developers.
It includes a roadmap so you
can decide which sections of
the document you need to read.
Also, the old EnterpriseObjects related
programming topics have been revamped
and incorporated into this document.
On the subject of programming topics,
like I said,
some of the old ones have been updated
and incorporated into EnterpriseObjects,
web applications, and other books.
Other topics no longer apply.
There are a handful left that we're
planning to update to coincide
with the 5.22 release date.
police.
Project Builder for
WebObjects developers.
It supplements the main Project Builder
documentation with WebObjects specifics.
WebApplications,
formerly known as Discovering
WebObjects for HTML,
gets you started with WebApplication
development using WebObjects.
It has a short series of exercises
that get you started building
your own WebObjects applications.
And for a glimpse into the future,
for 5.22,
we're planning on publishing the
API diffs between 5.2 and 5.22.
Now that I've talked
about the documentation,
I'd like to explain how
to access it using the new
developer documentation website.
The new site is based on developer input.
It aims for more consistent
design and organization.
[Transcript missing]
Farther down the page,
you see a complete list of the WebObjects
documents available on the site.
You can sort by either
title or publication date.
Have any of you had a
chance to see the new site?
Please do.
Over the course of this week from
1:00 to 4:00 p.m., there will be
TechPub staff people at the ADC booth
downstairs to show you the new site,
answer your questions,
and get your feedback.
In closing,
I hope that you've gained more knowledge
about the WebObjects documentation set
and how to access it using the new site.
Again, thanks for your feedback.
Keep it coming.
And now back to you, Wiley,
to close the session.
Thanks, Catherine.
So hopefully you've got a
taste for what WebObjects is,
what the capabilities are,
and what some of the directions are.
I do want to emphasize that
there's been a lot of work going
on in WebObjects in the last year,
and we would encourage all
of you to actually take a
hard look at the sessions,
even if you're familiar with WebObjects.
We have, first of all,
some fairly good introductory
sessions in terms of the
WebObjects technical overview,
session 603, WebObjects and J2EE,
session 605, and rapid application
development with WebObjects.
I think this is a good track if you
want to get an overview and a start
in understanding WebObjects as an
application development environment.
We also have, for people who are more
sysadmin deployment-oriented,
have their applications finished, 612,
Enterprise Application Deployment,
and encourage you to
check out that session.
We have some more advanced
sessions as well on WebObjects,
614, WebObjects Reusable Components.
It's going to talk about reuse.
616, Advanced Topics in EOF, and 624,
Creating Web Services,
which I think is going to be a
very exciting session for those
of you interested in that area.
We also encourage you, of course,
to come to the feedback
forum for WebObjects.
That's FF007.
will be in
North Beach Thursday at 9:00 a.m.
That's a quick overview
of the session roadmap.
We have, of course,
our who to contact slide.
I encourage you to talk to these
people if you have feedback and
questions on the WebObjects product.
Of course, we've got a lot of resources
available online at Apple.com.
I think Catherine's already
spoken to some of that.
And encourage you to join our
WebObjects announced mailing list to
get news as we update it on WebObjects.
So at this point, I'd like to invite
questions from the audience.